# Incident: 2026-04-06 14:28:40

## Summary

Between the hour of 14:28 and 14:40 on 2026-04-06, 9 users encountered failed pizza order requests due to the chaos monkey. The event was triggered by chaos at 14:28-14:29 in the pizza factory external service. The fix consisted of following a link in the response body of the failed requests.

Chaos on the pizza factory server caused all pizza creation requests to fail. The event was shown by 100% failures on the pizza creation metrics panel. I started working on this event by looking at the failure logs to learn more about the issue. This incident affected only 9 pizza requests and therefore 9 users.

## Detection

I detected the incident at about 14:35 by manually looking at the dashboard and seeing all the pizza requests were failing.

There was an alert set up to immediately trigger (no waiting period) if the pizza request failures ever reached >5 per minute. However, the traffic being generated to the website was only enough to push the pizza failure number up to about 3 per minute. This meant the alert was not triggered.

I changed the alert to instead fire instantly if pizza failures ever go above 2 per minute, which will catch this bug if it happens again.

## Impact

For 12 minutes between 20:28 UTC and 20:40 UTC on 04/06/2026, our users experienced spontaneous pizza creation failures.

This incident affected 9 customers, who experienced failures when attempting to order a pizza due to a chaos monkey in the pizza factory external service.

## Timeline

All times are UTC.

- 20:27 - All users are experiencing normal functionality
- 20:28 - A user gets a failed pizza request, but this was due overflowing the ovens
- 20:30 - Users start to see failed pizza creation requests due to chaos monkey
- 20:35 - Owen Larson notices the unusual amount of failed pizza requests
- 20:36 - Owen Larson starts looking through the logs to find reason for failed pizza requests
- 20:39 - Owen Larson finds link in response logs from pizza factory that has a link to follow to fix chaos
- 20:40 - Chaos has ended and users continue to experience expected functionality

## Response

Owen Larson responded to the incident after noticing an abnormal amount of failed pizza requests in his metrics dashboard. He wasn't alerted by grafana as he expected because the alerts were not set up properly to catch the pizza creation errors. It was set up to trigger if pizza failures ever got to 5 per minute, but there was only enough traffic being generated to get it to just over 3 per minute. The alert was adjusted to fix this. Now it will send an alert if the pizza failures ever go over 2 per minute, with no pending period.

## Root Cause

Random chaos was initiated in the pizza factory external server that spontaneously caused all pizza creation requests to fail. This meant everyone who tried to order a pizza could not do so.

## Resolution

After looking through the logs, a link to a website that would end the pizza factory chaos was found. The link was followed which responded with the following message:

```json
{ "message": "Problem resolved. Pizza is back on the menu!" }
```

Then, the metrics and logs were observed for a few minutes, and they were observed to have returned to normal. It was at this time the incident was deemed over.

The response time could have been quicker if the alert was set up properly as outlined earlier. Now that it is in place, if the chaos initiates again, Owen Larson will be alerted immediately.

## Prevention

This issue has not happened before. One way to prevent spontaneous chaos would be to write our own self managed pizza factory. This would allow us to ensure a chaos monkey doesn't start declining pizza orders. However, as it currently stands we need to be prepared in the case that the pizza factory has chaos again.

## Action Items

1. Ensure the alerts are set up properly to fire immediately when pizza creation failures reach an unexpected rate.
2. Ensure developers are available and checking their email often
3. Immediately when the alert is fired, go look at the response logs to determine if the chaos monkey has caused the problem again.
4. Follow the link provided to end the chaos.
